MDAP Increment Lead Component: Navy Common Name: DDG 51 Flight III
DDG 51 Arleigh Burke Class Destroyer, Flight III (DDG 51)
The Navy’s DDG 51 Flight III destroyer is planned to be a multimission ship
designed to operate against air, surface, and underwater threats.
Compared with existing Flight IIA ships of the same class, the Navy expects
Flight III ships to provide the fleet with enhanced ballistic missile and air
defense capability. Flight III’s changes include replacing the current SPY-
1D(V) radar with the Air and Missile Defense Radar program’s AN/SPY-
6(V)1 radar and upgrading the destroyer’s Aegis combat system. As with
prior ships in the class, Flight III ships are being built by two different
shipyards—in Bath, Maine, and Pascagoula, Mississippi.
Source: U. S. Navy. | GAO-24-106831
Estimated Cost and Quantities Current Status
(fiscal year 2024 dollars in millions)
Since last year’s assessment, the Navy completed the acceptance trial for the
lead Flight III ship—DDG 125—and took delivery of the ship in June 2023 as
planned. The program experienced cost growth for the first two Flight III ships,
with the program office stating that it requested an additional $290 million for
fiscal years 2023 and 2024 to cover the government’s portion of cost overruns
for certain contracts. The program office stated that issues at both shipyards
with hiring, retention, and workforce experience—and the associated
construction inefficiencies—contributed to the cost growth.
Cost reflects 27 Flight III ships bought or planned from fiscal Shipyard performance is also significantly hindering the schedule for follow-on
years 2017-2028.
ships. The program office estimates delivery delays ranging from 6 to 25 months
Software Development as of January 2024 for the 13 follow-on ships purchased during fiscal years 2017-2022. The Navy
awarded new contracts to both shipbuilders in August 2023 that support
procurement of nine more DDG 51 Flight III ships, with options for additional
ships in fiscal years 2023 through 2027. Further delivery delays could have
significant consequences for the Navy’s efforts to counter current and future air
and surface threats.
The program office stated that it plans to complete Flight III initial operational
test and evaluation by fiscal year 2028. The plan’s first test period focuses on
ballistic missile defense, surface warfare, and initial integrated air and missile
defense events. The program office expects the results from this test period to
inform an initial operational capability determination for Flight III planned for
August 2024. The program office also noted risk to achieving initial operational
capability as scheduled because of all the test events planned to be
accomplished in what the program considers a compressed timeline.
Program Essentials
Prime contractors: General Dynamics-Bath Iron Works; Program Office Comments
Huntington Ingalls Industries
We provided a draft of this assessment for program office review and comment.
Contract type: FPI (construction)
The program office provided technical comments, which we incorporated
where appropriate. The program office stated that the DDG 51 program is one
of the Navy’s longest-running production lines and has delivered 73 ships to the
fleet. The program office also stated that, of the 26 Arleigh Burke class ships
under contract, 12 ships are in various stages of production and the rest are in
pre-construction activities. The program office added that, in addition to
progressing toward delivery of the final few Flight IIA ships, the program is
making significant progress in testing the first Flight III ship.
Page 151 U.S. Government Accountability Office GAO-24-106831 Weapon Systems Annual Assessment