Future Major Weapon Acquisition Lead Component: Navy Common Name: MK 54 MOD 2 (ALWT)
MK 54 MOD 2 Advanced Lightweight Torpedo (ALWT)
The Navy’s MK 54 MOD 2 program is developing an advanced lightweight
torpedo for use by U.S. surface ships, fixed-wing aircraft, and helicopters in
anti-submarine warfare. The Navy plans to upgrade the MK-54 MOD 1
torpedo’s guidance and control, propulsion system, and warhead to
achieve higher speeds and maneuverability, greater depths, and increased
lethality. The program continues to complete early system development
activities and plans to formally get approval for development start as a
major defense acquisition program on a yet-to-be determined date in fiscal
year 2024.
Source: Alion Science and Technology. | GAO-24-106831
Estimated Cost and Quantities Current Status
(fiscal year 2024 dollars in millions)
The Navy tailored the major capability acquisition pathway to accelerate
delivery of the MK 54 MOD 2 torpedo. However, since our last assessment,
most major program milestones have been delayed by 8 to 9 months. Last year
we reported that the program’s acquisition strategy had significant risks, in part
due to a compressed schedule.
According to the program office, subsystem development has taken longer than
expected because the contractors’ delivery of the hardware needed for testing
has been delayed. The program now expects to begin in-water tests, which are
critical to discovering issues on torpedo programs, in late fiscal year 2024.
Cost and quantity represent fiscal years 2019-2028.
Program officials also reported that contractors’ estimated costs to complete
system development and testing were significantly higher than expected. This
Software Development as of January 2024 delayed the anticipated award of the other transaction agreement for this work
to fiscal year 2024. The program moved the decision review to formally enter
system development from 2023 to a to-be-determined date in 2024 because
DOD has yet to complete its independent cost estimate.
The program stated it is using an iterative approach for development and cited
practices that we found leading companies employ to successfully develop and
deliver products to users with speed. For example, according to program
officials, the Navy deferred the high altitude and vertical launch capabilities for
the MK 54 MOD 2 to deliver a minimally viable product faster. The program is
also building on the Navy’s history of using a modular open systems approach
and an architecture that supports software updates for its torpedo programs.
We previously found that these practices helped leading companies add to or
Program officials reported that the decrease in the frequency of enhance capabilities and keep systems relevant longer.
testing and feedback this year was due to delays in the delivery
of hardware for in-water testing.
Program Office Comments
Program Essentials
We provided a draft of this assessment to the program office for review and
Prime contractor: Progeny Systems Corporation;
Northrup Grumman Corporation; Aerojet Rocketdyne; comment. According to the program office, the MK 54 MOD 2 ALWT addresses
Raytheon Technologies a critical gap in the U.S. Navy's Anti-Submarine Warfare weapon inventory to
Contract type: CPFF (using other transaction authority) prosecute challenging adversary submarines. The program added that to meet
the operational need for the MK 54 MOD 2, it continues to optimize the
development schedule and approach to field lethality upgrades as quickly as
possible within funding constraints.
Page 163 U.S. Government Accountability Office GAO-24-106831 Weapon Systems Annual Assessment