MDAP Increment Lead Component: Navy Common Name: DDG 51 Flight III
DDG 51 Arleigh Burke Class Destroyer, Flight III
The Navy’s DDG 51 Flight III destroyer is planned to be a multimission ship
designed to operate against air, surface, and underwater threats.
Compared with existing Flight IIA ships of the same class, the Navy expects
new Flight III ships to provide the fleet with increased ballistic missile and
air defense capabilities. Flight III’s changes include replacing the current
SPY-1D(V) radar with the Air and Missile Defense Radar program’s AN/SPY-
6(V)1 radar and upgrading the destroyer’s Aegis combat system.
Source: Huntington Ingalls Industries. | GAO-23-106059
Estimated Cost and Quantities Current Status
fiscal year 2023 dollars in millions
The program reported that the first eight DDG 51 Flight III ships are under
construction, with an additional six under contract, and the Navy plans to
deliver the lead ship—DDG 125—in June 2023. Program officials noted that
there is a risk to the delivery schedule due to first-time integration of the new
electrical power system and combat system. They said that they plan to use
recently completed sea trials and further testing to mitigate these risks.
The program pushed back the planned start of sea trials from September 2022
to December 2022 due to these first-time integration challenges and continues
to assess cost and schedule effects, according to program officials. We
Cost reflects the 24 Flight III ships bought and planned from fisca previously reported on risks to program cost and schedule due to power system
years 2017–2027. The Navy plans to procure additional ships
during this period and is authorized to enter into one or more updates after tests on Flight IIA ships showed the initial system did not meet
multiyear contracts to procure up to 15 additional ships starting
in fiscal year 2023. requirements. The program mitigated this risk with a replacement power
system on Flight IIA ships, according to program officials.
Software Development as of January 2023
The program experienced additional cost growth for the first two Flight III ships
over the past year and reported receiving $168 million in fiscal year 2023 to
cover the government’s portion of cost overruns for certain contracts. Program
officials told us that the cost growth is primarily due to first time build
challenges and is capped by the price ceiling on the contract.
The Navy purchased a total of 14 Flight III ships thus far and received authority
to enter into one or more multiyear contracts to procure up to 15 ships starting
in fiscal year 2023, according to program officials. Competition for these
procurement contracts is ongoing. This plan aligns with the Navy’s current long-
range planning for force structure requirements.
Program Office Comments
Program Essentials We provided a draft of this assessment to the program office for review and
comment. The program office provided technical comments, which we
Prime contractors: General Dynamics-Bath Iron Works;
Huntington Ingalls Industries incorporated where appropriate. According to the program, the Arleigh Burke
Contract type: FPI (construction) class destroyer is one of the Navy’s longest-running production lines, which
delivered 72 ships. Production continues with a number of ships under contract,
in various stages of production, and in preconstruction activities, according to
the program. It added that, in addition to ongoing progress to deliver the final
few Flight IIA destroyers, the program continues toward Flight III delivery, test
and evaluation, and deployment.
Page 163 U.S. Government Accountability Office GAO-23-106059 Weapon Systems Annual Assessment