MTA Lead Component: Air Force Common Name: B-52 CERP RVP
B-52 Commercial Engine Replacement Program (CERP)
Rapid Virtual Prototype (RVP)
The CERP RVP effort is expected to deliver a virtual system prototype to
reduce risk and inform the Air Force’s overall B-52 CERP. The B-52 CERP
plans to support nuclear and conventional operations by replacing the
aircraft’s engine with military-configured commercial engines. Along with
the new engines, the B-52 CERP will replace associated subsystems, such
as engine struts, the electrical power generation system, and cockpit
displays for the B-52H fleet.
Source: U. S. Air Force. GAO-23-106059
Estimated Middle Tier of Acquisition Cost and Quantities fiscal year 2023 dollars in millions
Quantity refers to the one virtual prototype the program is acquiring under the MTA effort.
aGAO-22-105230
Program Background and Transition Plan
Since 2018, the program office worked with Boeing to conduct risk reduction requirements studies and deliver virtual
prototypes. In 2021, Rolls Royce was selected to work with Boeing to integrate its engine into the virtual system prototype
design. Initial capability for CERP RVP (increment 1) was delivered in September 2021, and the full capability (increment 2) is
expected to be delivered in November 2023. The program plans to transition to the major capability acquisition pathway with
entry at system development in late fiscal year 2023.
Software Development as of January 2023 Attainment of Business Case Knowledge as of January 2023
Key Elements of a Business Case Status at Initiation Current Status
Approved requirements document ● ●
Approved middle tier of acquisition strategy ● ●
Formal technology risk assessment ● ●
Cost estimate based on independent assessment ● ●
Formal schedule risk assessment ● ●
● Knowledge attained ○ Knowledge not attained … Information not available NA - Not applicable
The program reported that end user feedback and tracking of
software deliveries will occur after the program transitions to
the major capability acquisition pathway. The program
reported software costs for the total B-52 CERP program to be
$101 million, which includes costs beyond the MTA rapid virtual
prototyping effort.
Program Essentials
Prime contractors: Boeing: Rolls Royce
Contract type: CPIF, FFP
Page 101 U.S. Government Accountability Office GAO-23-106059 Weapon Systems Annual Assessment