Future Major Weapon Acquisition Lead Component: Navy Common Name: MK 54 MOD 2 (ALWT)
MK 54 MOD 2 Advanced Lightweight Torpedo (ALWT)
The Navy’s MK 54 MOD 2 program is developing an advanced lightweight
torpedo for use by U.S. surface ships, fixed-wing aircraft, and helicopters
in anti-submarine warfare. The Navy plans to upgrade the MK-54 MOD 1
torpedo’s guidance and control, propulsion system, and warhead to
achieve higher speeds and maneuverability, greater depths, and
increased lethality. The program is currently conducting early system
development activities and plans to formally enter system development
as a major defense acquisition program in 2023.
Source: Alion Science and Technology. | GAO-23-106059
Estimated Cost and Quantities Current Status
fiscal year 2023 dollars in millions
The Navy is using a tailored version of the major capability acquisition pathway
to try to accelerate delivery of the MK 54 MOD 2 torpedo. In an effort to
shorten development, the MK 54 MOD 2 program collaborated with industry
early on the system’s requirements and preliminary design and took advantage
of the flexibility offered by other transaction authority (OTA) agreements. The
Navy reported that using an existing OTA with Advanced Technology
International, it selected four companies to develop improved guidance and
control, warhead, propulsion systems, and a prototype torpedo. The program
does not expect to hold a decision review to formally enter system
Cost and quantity represent fiscal years 2019–2028. development until 2023, due to challenges associated with creating an
independent cost estimate for a fully upgraded torpedo.
Software Development as of January 2023 The Navy’s acquisition strategy has significant risks. The program started system
development before technology maturation was complete. Our prior work
shows that programs increase the risk of costly rework when they proceed with
system development without fully mature technologies. The Navy also
completed an independent assessment in June 2022 that noted the program’s
planned schedule was shorter than prior torpedo upgrades, which were more
limited in scope. A compressed schedule makes addressing technical risks more
challenging and delays in delivering capability more likely.
Nevertheless, the program incorporated several leading industry practices for
iterative product development. For example, according to program officials, the
program deferred the high-altitude and vertical launch capabilities for the MK
54 MOD 2 until after initial operating capability to deliver a minimally viable
product faster, and plans to begin work on this requirement in fiscal year 2024.
Program Essentials
Prime contractors: Progeny Systems Corporation,
Program Office Comments
Northrup Grumman Corporation, Aerojet Rocketdyne,
Raytheon Technologies We provided a draft of this assessment to the program office for review and
Contract type: CPFF (using other transaction authority) comment. The program office provided technical comments, which we
incorporated where appropriate. According to the program office, the MK 54
Mod 2 is intended to address a capability gap in countering adversary
submarine targets and near-peer threats. The program office stated that it is
executing a compressed development schedule to meet operational needs
while maintaining focus on fielding capabilities on time and within cost targets.
Page 172 U.S. Government Accountability Office GAO-23-106059 Weapon Systems Annual Assessment